Two households, both alike in dignity
(In fair Verona, where we lay our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents’ rage,
Which, but their children’s end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Chorus exits.
ACT 1
Scene 1
Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers,
of the house of Capulet.

SAMPSON  Gregory, on my word we’ll not carry coals.
GREGORY  No, for then we should be colliers.
SAMPSON  I mean, an we be in choler, we’ll draw.
GREGORY  Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of
collar.
SAMPSON  I strike quickly, being moved.
GREGORY  But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
SAMPSON  A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
GREGORY  To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to
stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn’st
away.
SAMPSON  A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.
GREGORY  That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest
goes to the wall.
SAMPSON  ’Tis true, and therefore women, being the
weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore
I will push Montague’s men from the wall and
thrust his maids to the wall.
GREGORY  The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.
SAMPSON  ’Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
with the maids; I will cut off their heads.
GREGORY  The heads of the maids?
SAMPSON  Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
GREGORY  They must take it in sense that feel it.
SAMPSON  Me they shall feel while I am able to stand,
and ’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
GREGORY  ’Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor-john. Draw thy tool. Here comes
of the house of Montagues.

Enter Abram with another Servingman.

SAMPSON  My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back
thee.
GREGORY  How? Turn thy back and run?
SAMPSON  Fear me not.
GREGORY  No, marry. I fear thee!
SAMPSON  Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.
GREGORY  I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it
as they list.
SAMPSON  Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at
them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.
He bites his thumb.
ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON  I do bite my thumb, sir.
ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON, aside to Gregory  Is the law of our side if I
say “Ay”?
GREGORY, aside to Sampson  No.
SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir,
but I bite my thumb, sir.
GREGORY  Do you quarrel, sir?
ABRAM  Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
SAMPSON  But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as
good a man as you.
ABRAM  No better.
SAMPSON  Well, sir.

Enter Benvolio.

GREGORY, aside to Sampson  Say “better”; here comes
one of my master’s kinsmen.
SAMPSON  Yes, better, sir.
ABRAM  You lie.
SAMPSON  Draw if you be men.—Gregory, remember
thy washing blow.They fight.
BENVOLIO  Part, fools!Drawing his sword.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

Enter Tybalt, drawing his sword.

TYBALT 
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.
BENVOLIO 
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
TYBALT 
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!They fight.

Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.

CITIZENS 
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.

CAPULET 
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
LADY CAPULET 
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a
sword?

Enter old Montague and his Wife.
CAPULET 
My sword, I say. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
MONTAGUE 
Thou villain Capulet!—Hold me not; let me go.
LADY MONTAGUE 
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

Enter Prince Escalus with his train.

PRINCE 
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel—
Will they not hear?—What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona’s ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
All but Montague, Lady Montague,
and Benvolio exit.